Create monitoring.md (#357)
subspace/subspace-docs: versioned_docs/version-latest/learn/monitoring.md

---
title: Monitoring
sidebar_position: 4
description: Monitoring server with Grafana and Prometheus. Scraping metrics from Subspace Node.
keywords:
  - Monitoring
  - Grafana
  - Prometheus
  - Exporter
  - Metrics
  - Docker
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';
import Link from '@docusaurus/Link';
import styles from '@site/src/pages/index.module.css';

-----------

### Setting Up Monitoring Infrastructure

> **Infrastructure Setup:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Infrastructure Setup Overview:**
```

Author: Of course the correct one is under 'learn' sect.

Reviewer: Can we remove the other one please?

> Commence by installing and configuring exporters, such as Node Exporter, on the servers earmarked for monitoring. Occasionally, Prometheus client libraries are integrated into application code to reveal metrics at `<host>/metrics`, facilitating the monitoring of specific applications (e.g., Subspace node leverages this functionality). No alterations are necessary in the exporter configuration files on these servers; the default configurations suffice.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Commence by installing and configuring metrics exporters, such as Node Exporter, on the servers earmarked for monitoring. Occasionally, Prometheus compatible endpoints are integrated into application code to reveal metrics at `<host>/metrics`, facilitating the monitoring of specific applications (e.g. Subspace node leverages this functionality). No alterations are necessary in the exporter configuration files on these servers; the default configurations suffice.
```

Author: Isn't that correct, Jim, `Prometheus client libraries are integrated into application code to reveal metrics at `<host>/metrics` ?

Author: improved the readability of this whole list in the Infrastructure Setup Overview section

Reviewer: > Isn't that correct, Jim, `Prometheus client libraries are integrated into application code to reveal metrics at `/metrics` ?

They are not always exposed at `/metrics` and it would be the server libraries rather than client libraries?

> Configure Prometheus to collect data from Node Exporter by specifying settings in the `prometheus.yml` file, often found in `/etc/prometheus`. This file defines remote server addresses where exporters operate as scraping targets for Prometheus to retrieve metrics. Exporters make metrics available via HTTP, accessible through HTTP requests to the `/metrics` endpoint. Typically, this communication occurs over port 9090 by default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Configure Prometheus to collect data from Node Exporter by specifying settings in the `prometheus.yml` file, often found in `/etc/prometheus`. This file defines remote server addresses where exporters operate as scraping targets for Prometheus to retrieve metrics. Exporters make metrics available via HTTP, accessible through HTTP requests to the `/metrics` endpoint. For Node Exporter, this communication occurs over port 9090 by default.
```

> Set up a Grafana server or any tool interacting with Prometheus to query metrics and craft visualizations. This process encompasses establishing connections to databases housing metrics, configuring dashboards, graphs, variables, and jobs to aptly represent the data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Setup a Grafana server or any tool interacting with Prometheus to query metrics and craft visualizations. This process encompasses establishing connections to databases housing metrics, configuring dashboards, graphs, variables, and jobs to aptly represent the data.
```

Author: got it. Corrected all 'set up' occasions

For enhanced performance, security, and ease of management, it's advisable to install Prometheus and Grafana on a dedicated server for monitoring purposes.

**Configuration Steps:**

> Facilitate communication among these components by adding ports to the firewall.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Facilitate communication among these components by configuring the firewall to expose necessary ports.
```

On the server hosting Prometheus, modify the `prometheus.yml` file under the `scrape_configs` section. Below is an example block for each monitored server:

> ```yaml

Reviewer: The indentation here is wrong for a copy/paste. The whole block should have two spaces added before each line to just work.

- **CPU:** Similar to the Prometheus server, a dual-core processor or higher is advised.
- **RAM:** Allocate a minimum of 2GB or more to support Grafana's functionalities.
- **Storage:** Plan for 20GB to accommodate Grafana's installation and storage of dashboard configurations and additional data. The exact storage demand depends on the number and complexity of dashboards and visualizations.

These recommendations provide a foundation; however, actual resource needs might scale according to the number of monitored systems, data collection frequency, and retention duration.

---
---

## 1. Node Exporter

### Creating a User
To create a user:

```bash
sudo useradd --no-create-home --shell /sbin/nologin node_exporter
```

### Installation

Download the latest version binary from the [Prometheus homepage](https://prometheus.io/download):

```bash
wget https://github.com/prometheus/node_exporter/releases/download/v1.7.0/node_exporter-1.7.0.linux-amd64.tar.gz
tar xvfz node_exporter-*-amd64.tar.gz
```

Copy the binary:

```bash
sudo cp node_exporter*amd64/node_exporter /usr/local/bin
sudo chown node_exporter:node_exporter /usr/local/bin/node_exporter
rm -R node_exporter*
```

---

> Here's a revised version:

Reviewer: One of the two `---` also needs to go.

> Here's a revised version:

Author: I get it. Yeah, I missed it. I of course removed those GPT remnants at the end of my work. But then I needed to run the text through GPT one more time and I was in a hurry.... and there were artifacts all over the place.

> Here's a revised version:

Reviewer 2: No worries at all, thanks for taking the time to check the grammar through the GPT 🙇

---

### Prometheus.yml on a Prometheus Server
(incorporating the job for scraping the Subspace node)

To edit the Prometheus configuration file:

```bash
sudo vi /etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml
```

Copy and paste these lines into the file:

```bash
global:
  scrape_interval: 15s

scrape_configs:
  - job_name: 'farmer-1'
    scrape_interval: 5s
    static_configs:
      - targets: ['<farmer-1-ip>:xxxx']
  - job_name: 'farmer-2'
    scrape_interval: 5s
    static_configs:
      - targets: ['<farmer-2-ip>:xxxx']
  - job_name: 'farmer-3'
    scrape_interval: 5s
    static_configs:
      - targets: ['<farmer-3-ip>:xxxx']
# Job for scraping metrics from node
  - job_name: "subspace"
    scrape_interval: 5s
    static_configs:
      - targets: ['localhost:9615']
  - job_name: "FarmerServer"
    static_configs:
      - targets: ["localhost:9100"]

```

Once modifications are done in the `prometheus.yml` file, remember to reload the service:

```bash
sudo systemctl daemon-reload
```

Ensure to provide names for the `job_name`.

Please remember to delete archives and all extracted files from the home directory after distributing all components:

```bash
cd ~
rm -r prometheus*
```

---

> Here's a revised version:

Reviewer: Same comment as the last one of these - the dividers also need sorting.

> Here's a revised version:

Author: I don't know where these "Here's a revised version:" came from

---

### Creating a Service for Prometheus

Open the service file using your preferred text editor:

```bash
sudo vi /etc/systemd/system/prometheus.service
```

Add the following configuration to the file:

```bash
[Unit]
Description=Prometheus
Wants=network-online.target
After=network-online.target

[Service]
User=prometheus
Group=prometheus
Type=simple
ExecStart=/usr/local/bin/prometheus \
    --config.file /etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml \
    --storage.tsdb.path /var/lib/prometheus/ \
    --web.console.templates=/etc/prometheus/consoles \
    --web.console.libraries=/etc/prometheus/console_libraries

[Install]
WantedBy=multi-user.target
```

Remember to reload the daemon after making any service changes:

```bash
sudo systemctl daemon-reload			
# Run this whenever any service configuration changes
```

> 

Reviewer: No service `enable` and `start` steps here?

Author: no. Because there is service management section

---

> Here's a revised version for better readability:

Reviewer: Dividers.

---

### UFW Configuration

On the Prometheus Server:

> ```bash

Reviewer: Why are we allowing the farmer servers to access port 9100 on the monitoring machine? The Prometheus server will be hitting the farmer servers to scrape metrics, not the other way round?

Author: Good question ..

sudo ufw allow from <farmer-server-1-ip> to any proto tcp port 9100 comment 'Exporter-farmer-1'
sudo ufw allow from <farmer-server-2-ip> to any proto tcp port 9100 comment 'Exporter-farmer-2' 
```
Repeat this configuration for other farmer servers as necessary.

On the Monitored Servers:
```bash
sudo ufw allow from <prometheus-server-ip> to any proto tcp port 9100 comment 'Exporter-PrometheusServer'
```

### Service Management Commands:

```bash
sudo systemctl start prometheus			
# Start Prometheus service

sudo systemctl status prometheus			
# Check Prometheus service status

sudo systemctl enable prometheus			
# Enable Prometheus service for autostart

sudo systemctl disable prometheus			
# Disable autostart for Prometheus service
```

---

> Here's a revised version for improved readability:

Reviewer: Dividers.

---

## 3. Grafana Server

You have the option to utilize Grafana Cloud instead of managing and scaling your instance of Grafana. [Sign up for a free account](https://grafana.com/auth/sign-up?pg=download&plcmt=box-right), offering free access to 10k metrics, 50GB logs, 50GB traces, and more.

### Installation Guide - Latest Open Source Grafana Release (APT repository)

:::note
Choose between:
- Enterprise: Identical to the open-source version but offers additional features unlockable with a license.
- Open Source: Functionally identical to the Enterprise version without enterprise-specific features.
:::

### Steps to Download

> ```bash

Reviewer: Might be nice to explain what this is doing - that we are trusting Grafana's repository. Possibly link to the official docs this is copied from too.

echo "deb [signed-by=/etc/apt/keyrings/grafana.gpg] https://apt.grafana.com stable main" | sudo tee -a /etc/apt/sources.list.d/grafana.list
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install grafana
# Alternatively, use `sudo apt-get install grafana-enterprise` for the Enterprise version.
```

> *These commands execute a post-install script*:
```bash
addgroup --system grafana
adduser --system --home /usr/share/grafana --no-create-home --ingroup grafana --disabled-password --shell /bin/false grafana
```
> They grant necessary permissions for the system user 'grafana' to required folders.

:::note
In some cases during installation, you might encounter the error:  
> cannot access /etc/grafana/*: No such file or directory.  

This might occur due to VM permissions issues in creating missing configuration files. A solution is to navigate to the `/var/cache/apt/archives` directory—where apt stores downloaded packages before installation—or manually download the `.deb` file and use `dpkg --force flag`. For example: `dpkg --force-all -i grafana_10.2.2_amd64.deb`
:::

---

### Starting Server

```bash 
sudo systemctl daemon-reload
```

> ```bash

Reviewer: No service `enable`? Will the service auto start after a reboot without it?

Author: Added service management commands to the Grafana section!

        "--validator",
        "--name", "subspace"
#Prometheus port:
        "--prometheus-external"
        "--prometheus-port", "9615",

      ]
    healthcheck:
      timeout: 5s
      interval: 30s
      retries: 60
#This maps port 9615 on the host where Prometheus is running to the same port 9615 within Docker container.
    expose:
      - "9615:9615"
  
  farmer:
    depends_on:
      node:
        condition: service_healthy
    image: ghcr.io/subspace/farmer:gemini-3g-2023-dec-22
    volumes:
      - farmer-data:/var/subspace:rw
    ports:
      - "0.0.0.0:30533:30533/udp"
      - "0.0.0.0:30533:30533/tcp"
    restart: unless-stopped
    command:
      [
        "farm",
        "--node-rpc-url", "ws://node:9944",
        "--listen-on", "/ip4/0.0.0.0/udp/30533/quic-v1",
        "--listen-on", "/ip4/0.0.0.0/tcp/30533",
        "--reward-address", "st7GBwATPqtBkK5y4uXbV52euszPpFPw7wmkF8FywEqJaf8uP",
        "path=/var/subspace,size=100G"
      ]
volumes:
  node-data:
  farmer-data:            
```
> The above section should be copied from the [official Subspace Docker Compose
guide](https://docs.subspace.network/docs/farming-&-staking/farming/advanced-cli/cli-install)
    

> > The below section defines the containers we need for the monitoring stack

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The below section defines the containers we need for the monitoring stack
```

Author: I think we should somehow highlight these tips that these are two parts of one big file, and that they need to be compiled separately

Author: So I try to use up and down arrows

Reviewer: Hard to see how this renders without a fresh preview.

        - prometheus_data:/prometheus
        command:
        - '--config.file=/etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml'
        - '--storage.tsdb.path=/prometheus'
        - '--web.console.libraries=/etc/prometheus/console_libraries'
        - '--web.console.templates=/etc/prometheus/consoles'
        - '--web.enable-lifecycle'
        expose:
        - 9090:9090

    node-exporter:
        image: prom/node-exporter:latest
        container_name: node-exporter
        restart: unless-stopped
        volumes:
        - /proc:/host/proc:ro
        - /sys:/host/sys:ro
        - /:/rootfs:ro
        command:
        - '--path.procfs=/host/proc'
        - '--path.rootfs=/rootfs'
        - '--path.sysfs=/host/sys'
        - '--collector.filesystem.mount-points-exclude=^/(sys|proc|dev|host|etc)($$|/)'
        expose:
        - 9100
    # The above section defines the containers we need for the monitoring stack
    volumes:
    # These first two volumes are required by the default setup from the official guide
    node-data:
    farmer-data:
    # These next volumes are required by the monitoring solution
    grafana_data:
    prometheus_data:
```

> > End of the file

Reviewer 2: This is not being displayed correctly, perhaps can be removed.

Author: changed 

> End of file

for
&#x2191; &#x2191; The above section defines the containers we need for the monitoring stack &#x2191;&#x2191;
